I have a confession to make
but first I want you to make a little
confession to me in the past year would
you just raise your hand if you've
experienced relatively little stress
anyone hmm how about a moderate amount
of stress who's experienced a lot of
stress yeah me too
but that is not my confession my
confession is this I am the health
psychologist and my mission is to help
people be happier and healthier but I
fear that something I've been teaching
for the last 10 years is doing more harm
than good and it has to do with stress
for years I've been telling people
stress makes you sick it increases the
risk of everything from the common cold
to cardiovascular disease basically I've
turned stress into the enemy but I've
changed my mind about stress and today I
want to change yours let me start with
the study that made me rethink my whole
approach to stress this study tracked
30,000 adults in the United States for
eight years and they started by asking
people how much stress have you
experienced in the last year they also
asked do you believe that stress is
harmful for your health and then they
use public death records to find out who
died okay
some bad news first people who
experience a lot of stress in the
previous year had a 43% increased risk
of dying but that was only true for the
people who also believed that stress is
harmful for your health people who
experience a lot of stress but did not
view stress as harmful were no more
likely to die in fact they had the
lowest risk of dying of anyone in the
study including people who had
relatively little stress now the
researchers estimated that over the
eight years they were tracking deaths
one hundred and eighty-two thousand
Americans died prematurely not from
stress but from the belief that stress
is bad for you
that is over 20,000 deaths a year now if
that estimate is correct that would make
believing stress is bad for you the 15th
largest cause of death in the United
States last year killing more people
than skin cancer hiv/aids and homicide
you can see why the study freaked me out
here I've been spending so much energy
telling people stress is bad for your
health so this study got me wondering
can changing how you think about stress
make you healthier and here the science
says yes when you change your mind about
stress you can change your body's
response to stress now to explain how
this works I want you all to pretend
that you are participants in a study
designed to stress you out it's called
the social stress test you come into the
laboratory and you're told you have to
give a five minute impromptu speech on
your personal weaknesses to a panel of
expert evaluators sitting right in front
of you and to make sure you feel the
pressure there are bright lights and a
camera in your face kind of like this
and the evaluators have been trained to
give you discouraging nonverbal feedback
like this now that you're sufficiently
demoralized time for part two a math
test and unbeknownst to you the
experimenter has been trained to harass
you during it now we're gonna all do
this together it's gonna be fun for me
okay
I want you all to count backwards from
996 in increments of seven you're gonna
do this out loud as fast as you can
starting with 996 go go faster faster
please you're going too slow stop stop
stop stop that guy made a mistake we're
gonna have to start all over again
you're not very good at this are you
okay so you get the idea now if you were
actually in this study you'd probably be
a little stressed out your heart might
be pounding you might be breathing fast
or maybe breaking out into a sweat and
normally we interpret these physical
changes as anxiety or signs that we
aren't coping very well with the
pressure but what have you viewed them
instead as signs that your body was
energized was preparing you to meet this
challenge now that is exactly what
participants were told in a study
conducted at Harvard University before
they went through the social stress
tests they were taught to rethink their
stress response as helpful that pounding
heart is preparing you for action if
you're breathing faster it's no problem
it's getting more oxygen to your brain
and participants who learned to view the
stress response as helpful for their
performance well they were less stressed
out less anxious more confident but the
most fascinating finding to me was how
their physical stress response changed
now in a typical stress response your
heart rate goes up and your blood
vessels constrict like this and this is
one of the reasons that chronic stress
is sometimes associated with
cardiovascular disease it's not really
healthy to be in this state all the time
but in the study when participants
viewed their stress response as helpful
their blood vessel stayed relaxed like
this their heart was still pounding but
this is a much healthier cardiovascular
profile it actually looks a lot like
what happens in moments of joy and
courage over a lifetime of stressful
experiences this one biological change
could be the difference
between a stress-induced heart attack at
age 50 and living well into your 90s and
this is really what the new science of
stress reveals but how you think about
stress matters so my goal as a health
psychologist has changed I no longer
want to get rid of your stress I want to
make you better at stress and we just
did a little intervention if you raise
your hand and said you'd had a lot of
stress in the last year we could have
saved your life because hopefully the
next time your heart is pounding from
stress you're going to remember this
talk and you're gonna think to yourself
this is my body helping me rise to this
challenge and when you view stress in
that way your body believes you and your
stress response becomes healthier now I
said I have over a decade of demonizing
stress to redeem myself from so we are
gonna do one more intervention I want to
tell you about one of the most
underappreciated aspects of the stress
response and the idea is this stress
makes you social to understand the side
of stress we need to talk about a
hormone oxytocin and I know oxytocin has
already gotten as much hype as a hormone
can get it even has its own cute
nickname the cuddle hormone because it's
release when you hug someone but this is
a very small part of what oxytocin is
involved in oxytocin is a neurohormone
it fine Tunes your brains social
instincts it Prime's you to do things
that strengthen close relationships
oxytocin makes you crave physical
contact with your friends and family it
enhances your empathy it even makes you
more willing to help and support the
people you care about some people have
even suggested we should snort oxytocin
to become more compassionate and caring
but here's what most people don't
understand about oxytocin it's a stress
hormone
your pituitary gland pumps this stuff
out as part of the stress response it's
as much a part of your stress response
as the adrenaline that makes your heart
pound
and when oxytocin is released in the
stress response it is motivating you to
seek support your biological stress
response is nudging you to tell someone
how you feel instead of bottling it up
your stress response wants to make sure
you notice when someone else in your
life is struggling so that you can
support each other when life is
difficult your stress response wants you
to be surrounded by people who care
about you okay so how is knowing this
side of stress going to make you
healthier well oxytocin doesn't only act
on your brain it also acts on your body
and one of its main roles in your body
is to protect your cardiovascular system
from the effects of stress it's a
natural anti-inflammatory it also helps
your blood vessels stay relaxed during
stress but my favorite effect on the
body is actually on the heart your heart
has receptors for this hormone and
oxytocin helps heart cells regenerate
and heal from any stress induced damage
this stress hormone strengthens your
heart and the cool thing is is that all
of these physical benefits of oxytocin
are enhanced by social contact and
social support so when you reach out to
others under stress either to seek
support or to help someone else you
release more of this hormone your stress
response becomes healthier and you
actually recover faster from stress I
find this amazing that your stress
response has a built-in mechanism for
stress resilience and that mechanism is
human connection I want to finish by
telling you about one more study and
listen up because this study could also
save a life this study tracked about a
thousand adults in the United States and
they ranged in age from 34 to 90
three and they started the study by
asking how much stress have you
experienced in the last year they also
asked how much time have you spent
helping out friends neighbors people in
your community and then they use public
records for the next five years to find
out who died okay so the bad news first
for every major stressful life
experience like financial difficulties
or family crisis that increase the risk
of dying by 30% but and I hope you are
expecting a but by now but that wasn't
true for everyone people who spent time
caring for others showed absolutely no
stress-related increase in dying zero
caring created resilience and so we see
once again that the harmful effects of
stress on your health are not inevitable
how you think and how you act can
transform your experience of stress when
you choose to view your stress response
as helpful you create the biology of
courage and when you choose to connect
with others under stress you can create
resilience now I wouldn't necessarily
ask for more stressful experiences in my
life but the science has given me a
whole new appreciation for stress stress
gives us access to our hearts the
compassionate heart that finds joy and
meaning and connecting with others and
yes
you're pounding physical heart working
so hard to give you strength and energy
and when you choose to view stress in
this way you're not just getting better
at stress you're actually making a
pretty profound statement you're saying
that you can trust yourself to handle
life's challenges and
you're remembering that you don't have
to face them alone
[Applause]
and this is um this is kind of amazing
what you're telling us it's just it
seems amazing to me that a belief about
stress can make so much difference to
someone's life expectancy how would that
extend to advice like if someone's
making a lifestyle choice between say a
stressful job and a non stressful job is
it it doesn't matter that which way they
go that it's it's equally wise to go for
the stressful job so long as you believe
that you can handle it in some sense
yeah and one thing we know for certain
is that chasing meaning is better for
your health and trying to avoid
discomfort and so I would say that's
really the best way to make decisions is
go after what it is that creates meaning
in your life and then trust yourself to
handle the stress that follows thank you
so much Kelly
[Applause]
[Music]